[Music]
if somebody says something out loud it's
10 times more powerful than if they
think it
and then as we started to study the data
particularly data that was just
reinforced by christine porath from
georgetown and harvard that negativity
is a multiple of four to seven times
more powerful than positivity
so think about that if i say something
out loud it's 10x if it's negative it's
four to seven times more powerful just
if you follow the data and you say
stupid out loud ultimately you're
predicting and perpetuating exactly what
you don't want to have happen and who's
always in control of what tom biliu says
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a former all-conference
two-sport college athlete who has turned
himself into one of the most
sought-after performance coaches on the
planet he's worked with 11 number one
draft picks and help roughly 700
world-class athletes prepare for the nfl
draft he's worked closely with some of
the most prestigious ncaa football
programs and coaches including nick
saban one of the most heralded coaches
college football has ever seen proving
that his methods work in real life he's
been part of eight national championship
games and worked with top performers
across virtually every major sport there
is he's helped train tennis players
golfers major league baseball players
nba players ufc fighters u.s special
forces personnel and even some of the
highest achieving ceos in business today
sports illustrated named him the sports
world's best brain trainer and he
co-starred with future hall of fame
quarterback russell wilson on espn's qb
to qb as well as appearing in espn's hit
show draft academy he's been featured by
countless major media outlets including
usa today mpr sports illustrated fox
sports and many others so please help me
in welcoming the man the highest
performing people and organizations
around the globe bring in when they need
that winning edge
the ceo of limitless minds and the
author of it takes what it takes trevor
malwad
hi there
welcome great to be here dude it's great
to have you what a privilege anybody
that is deep into the world of the
fundamentals of thinking has me at hello
yes i love that that's basically the
thrust of your book is there is a way to
think that will be useful for you and
there's a way to think that won't be yes
all right so now diving into um there's
really two concepts that i think set you
apart you've got
just how powerful negative thinking is
and some of the stats around that which
are pretty terrifying and some of the
stories that you have on that which are
i think will really shake people out
yeah um and then of course there's
neutral thinking so i think that's sort
of a
the next one two that we should walk
through yeah and and and then i think
probably the third part of that would be
sort of the impact of behavior you know
of identifying behavior but what i
learned ultimately my dad was the
president of the national association
for self-esteem most people probably
don't even know there is that
and he was one of the first authors of
chicken soup for the soul so for anybody
that's probably above 35 they would know
that but the power of positive thinking
never resonated with me
and
when i was young and i was 18 years old
and dropped out of college and i was
diagnosed with an initial diagnosis of
cancer and it turned out to be shingles
and a number of other things
i did start to understand quickly that
well i don't know if positive thinking
works all the time and that the data is
anecdotal i do know that negative
thinking does work and it works
negatively
and one of the things is i would start
at alabama and i would start with the
jacksonville jaguars and i'd start with
the miami dolphins i started to realize
and even looking back to a young age
that nobody wants to be told to be
positive that positive thinking is
probably the number one reason this
industry has not grown in my 44 years of
living
positive thinking in many cases repulses
people you're telling me to be positive
and i'm going through a divorce you're
telling me to be positive and i threw
three interceptions you're telling me to
be positive and i got to deal with this
president you're telling me to be
positive and i got this current
situation you're telling me to be
positive i got this health situation
so then what's the alternative well the
alternative has always been negative
so
when we would get to the university of
alabama
you have a this finite window of time
how long could you influence
everything comes down to influence would
you agree whether it's your family your
kids whatever the circumstance or the
situations so the ncaa gives you 22
hours to influence your players over a
week
and so when you look at the human
performance you look at nutrition you
look at strength and conditioning you
look at fatigue signs look at all these
different things
coach saban believed that there had to
be some emphasis on psychological
education
and so how are we going to do that and
how is it going to be efficient well
most people think of sports psychology
as treating somebody who has a problem
nick saban didn't look at it that way he
looked at how do we make our best
players better
how do we take great players and make
them greater and then how do we have an
educational platform for all 120 players
and a college football team is a
business it's 120 employees and you lose
35 of those
employees every year and it's an ebitda
driven business where when you succeed
you get more sponsorship and as you get
more sponsorship you make more money and
as you make more money the school makes
more money and everybody benefits and it
all happens from winning
but if your best players leave every
year and that 35 and they take their
great behaviors and their great habits
and their great mindset with them then
you're in trouble so you have to develop
programmatics you have to develop a
system i mean you look at quests and
what you guys did that ultimately when
you were going to sell it you're going
to evolve that there had to be if we're
going to create the ultimate metabolic
type of food or we're going to limit
like the recipe has to be the same so
you're not the only one that can cook it
so ultimately psychologically we had to
come up with a plan for everybody i
think that learning how to meditate and
regulate your breath is important but to
me i think that's ap chemistry and we
need an eighth grade version where we
just know okay that there's a a a table
of elements and we need the basics and
and so that's what we did when we
started to study what we learned was
that negative thinking
was the most powerful
element that our players were combating
that negative thinking was weaponized
weaponizing them against them so how's
negativity carried well is it your
internal thoughts well if you're dealing
with trying to change internal thoughts
then you've got to go to affirmations
and you've got to go to imagery you've
got to go to visualization very
difficult skills
well we started to look at the
externalization well if somebody says
something out loud it's 10 times more
powerful than if they think it
and then as we started to study the data
particularly data that was just
reinforced by christine porath from
georgetown and harvard that negativity
is a multiple of four to seven times
more powerful than positivity
so think about that if i say something
out loud it's 10x if it's negative it's
four to seven times more powerful so
when i say negative things out loud it's
40 to 70 times more likely that that
will happen or cause a result that won't
be good for me than if i just didn't say
anything
so as we were going into our second year
at alabama we were going into our first
year at florida state and we were
ultimately going into our second year at
the university of georgia we made a bet
what if we could just get our players to
not say stupid things out loud
what if we could just do that not teach
any element of positive thinking but
eliminate conversations about the heat
complaining about coaches complaining
about circumstances complaining about
situations verbalizing negativity but we
weren't going to lie to them and say hey
be positive we just taught them the data
and then what we did was some of the
things that you you noticed in the book
the stories in and around negativity are
incredible
tell us some bill buckner was one that
took my breath away
so so billy buckner who just passed away
recently was an incredible eight-time
gold glove a great baseball player for
the boston red sox
well he made a mistake in sports that
would be one of the biggest sport
bloopers in history and in 1986 he let
the game-winning run score on a ground
ball through his legs that ultimately
would give the mets the world series
now
i was just watching an espn e60 jeremy
story and i saw an interview that was
done in 1990 that resurfaced in 1995
where buckner was interviewed 12 days
before the world series and he said you
know the dreams are to win
you know to win the world series and the
nightmare would be for me to let the
game-winning run score on a ground ball
through my legs
you know and then ultimately that's
exactly what would happen now by saying
that out loud what did he do he didn't
make it happen but he increased the
probability
and this is what i want people to
understand your internal thoughts are
all over the place
i want to push on that yeah do you think
that he makes it more likely because
it's going to subtly influence his
behavior or because you're talking to
some magical deity that then says well
you said it and so i'm going to make it
happen i think that what he did is a
subconscious plant
by verbalizing it and knowing that it's
10 times more powerful he's planting it
in his subconscious he's not he doesn't
want it to happen but it becomes
something that's ultimately on his mind
and he gave it more power by verbalizing
it and then wasn't there somebody that
said i i worry that i'm gonna
retire and die at 40 of a heart attack
right so so pistol pete maravich a
basketball player i'll give you two
other examples but but he was
interviewed at 26 years old and he said
you know i don't want to play 10 years
of pro basketball and die at the age of
40 of a heart attack
well he played 10 years of pro
basketball in pasadena california died
of a heart attack at 40. there's another
great story that i saw
from a magazine called success unlimited
in 1973 a guy is hired to fix a
refrigerated boxcar in back of a train
he goes into the train he panics gets
himself locked inside the boxcar so now
he's pounding on the door there's
nothing to do he starts to panic and
thinks he's going to freeze to death he
finds a pen he starts writing down tom
what's going through his mind and he
writes down i'm becoming colder as
people one of the things we do to
ourselves is observe and report i'm not
playing well i'm having a bad day we're
having a bad quarter my marriage isn't
going well we observant report still
colder now he writes nothing to do but
wait half asleep i can hardly write
finally he says these might be my last
words and i'll show you the article they
open up the box car many hours later and
they find him and he's dead
but the temperature inside the box car
was 56 degrees that's so crazy the
freezing apparatus was broken there was
plenty of air in the boxcar there was no
physical reason for his death the best
they could say is somehow he talked
himself into dying and as you know the
book covers the psychogenic death in and
around the korean war
when the korean war one-third of all
american pows died and they said that
one of the things that was done in the
pow camps was the negativity they
manufactured articles about the united
states being bombed they withheld all
positivity they didn't give them any
mail believe it or not there are like
regulations for pow camps throughout the
world
and ultimately they filled up these
healthy american soldiers with all this
doubt a a priest would end up calling it
give up itis and healthy american
soldiers over a period of days would
walk over to a corner sit down and die
of broken hearts
so negativity is the most powerful thing
we're combating look at our politics
today a positive message versus a
negative message it's no no no chance
have you ever read men's search for
meaning i haven't read that guys you're
going to love it so man search for
meaning victor frankel in a conversation
yes yes yes yes
if i remember right he was in five
different concentration camps yes and
ultimately um he says that he you could
tell within 72 hours when someone was
gonna die because they would give up yep
and he said once they gave up then it
was a 72 hour clock they no longer knew
why they were fighting and and they
would just die
and he was like but the people that kept
a mental image of what they were
suffering for like what it was they were
gonna do once they got out for their
family for whatever
he said that they would push through and
it just i mean look there's obviously a
million and one reasons to die in a
concentration camp but the fact that
even in the concentration camp they
could go i'm 72 hours we can peg it
right because we've seen that person
give up right like that's just crazy to
me
well and and i just think when when i
think about
being seven years old in the tacoma golf
and country club and walking off the
golf course and my dad you know
everybody call mr positive and this and
that but in fairness to my dad when he
was raised and he was teaching the only
thing was positive and negative so if
you weren't negative you had to be
positive
but that just never made sense to me and
if we could just learn how to not be
negative how to not externalize negative
then ultimately that would help them
more than ever trying to be told to be
positive i love what you say just shut
your mouth
i thought that was you've said it even
more aggressively more aggressively i i
think it's super powerful right
what do you mean by that why is it so
critical well if just if you follow the
data and you say stupid out loud
ultimately you're predicting and
perpetuating exactly what you don't want
to have happen and who's always in
control of what tom biliu says you're
always in control of what you say people
say yeah but i can't the thinking
everybody's up in the thoughts
i've been with people the night before
super bowl the night before national
championships eight different times
where the doubt's there but we're not
externalizing it and then i'll have
people say well what do you want me to
lie i'm not telling you to lie
i'm telling you that if you look at the
information and you say
i don't want to be here today i hate
this job god dang they or or you look at
muhammad sanu they're down they're up
28-3 in the super bowl playing against
tom brady he looks at his friend and
says hey man they still got tom brady on
their side there is no lead that's safe
well why are you saying that you
know and you're almost predicting that
that's what's going to happen
now ultimately
not saying stupid things out loud is you
have to create an alternative
so i started thinking about a car
if a car's going backwards it can't
automatically go forward
so it has to to shift into neutral and
then it stops then at that point you can
either go forward by changing your
behavior or you can go backwards by
doing the same stupid you were just
doing neutral is truth-based thinking
what's the truth
okay in 2010 you're running a a data
loss company right you've been doing it
for eight years you graduated from ufc
film you're that's not what you want to
do you're 60 pounds overweight you lose
your weight you find two buddies and you
say hey man uh we're going to my kitchen
we're going to find a way to create a
product that's gonna be different than
anything anybody knows well i'm educated
in this because i partnered with
gatorade sports science institute at img
and i you know and you created a value
proposition that ultimately
you know based upon you didn't let your
past predict your future
you used your past was real but i want
to be do something different so you
behave this is this is a really
interesting part of what you say that
the past isn't predictive correct so
talk to me more about that because i
would say most people would say that the
past is definitely predictive right
which is great but they'd be wrong
right so they would be wrong and the
simple fact of the matter is the past is
real
okay
so
the only thing that makes it predictive
is if my behavior stays the same
so i'll give you a great story
so we both grew up in tacoma and there
used to be a thing called toastmasters i
don't know if you remember toastmasters
but toastmasters was a local regional
and a national speaking group for
anybody that wanted to get better at
speaking
well my dad had gone to a toastmasters
early on and heard one of the most
successful magazine entrepreneurs in the
world speak he comes back and tells me i
just had a chance to hear one of the
most successful magazine entrepreneurs
in the world
speak and he said when are you taking
your s.a.t i said i'm taking it next
year he said well this guy was failing
out of high school he was struggling he
was raised by a single mom in the
midwest but he promised his mother he
would take a test called the s.a.t
so he takes the sat in may's junior year
doesn't expect anything get to score
back in june now the sat which i don't
know how many your population know but
it's it's a standardized test with the
math part and a verbal part both are
scored out at 800 points well this guy
takes it he's he's bombing he's failing
out of school he doesn't expect anything
as he's telling the story of
toastmasters well he gets a 1480 out of
1600.
so he's stunned right that would be for
the smart people that listened to your
project yeah right cognitive dissonance
so i got a 900 on my sats just to give
people a framework right and i got a 10
90 and i got a 10 10. right i was just
hey four digits it was a miracle right
and and but it's a hard test and it you
you know it's a variety of different
things so he gets the score and his
mother doing what any mother would do
knowing her kid says did you cheat right
she knows her son and he said i swear to
god i tried to cheat but the way the
numbers were and the scantrons and the
bubbles you couldn't cheat so she says
you mean to tell me you really got that
score he said yeah i got the score so
he's stunned tom so as my dad telling me
the story i'm like okay so he says all
right so what he decides is because he
realizes he's smart and he's going into
his senior year he says i'm going to go
to class
now he starts to go to class he doesn't
hang out with who he did when he didn't
go to class
all right teacher see him in class and
they said hey maybe franklin pierce
maybe we missed the boat on this kid so
they start to treat him differently well
as the guy would tell the story he
graduates goes to a community college
goes on to wichita state goes under the
ivy league and becomes this massively
successful magazine entrepreneur so i
said okay well the guy was always smart
he just needed a standardized test to
unlock it my dad said no that's not the
story this is what i want you to
understand
he said 12 years after all this guy's
success he gets a letter in the mail
from princeton new jersey doesn't think
anything about it the next day his wife
says you're going to open it he opens it
true story turns out the s.a.t board
will periodically review their test
taking procedures and the policies the
year he took the test he was one of 13
people
sent the wrong s.a.t score
his actual score was a 740 out of 1600.
and he said people think my whole life
changed when i got to 1480. but what
happened my whole life changed when i
started acting like a 1480. and what
does a 1480 do he goes to class
well this is one of the first stories i
would share when i had my opportunity at
alabama or florida state or georgia so a
your language is powerful but number two
your behavior is way ahead of your
success
and so many people let their feelings
dictate what they do as opposed to throw
your behavior out there russell wilson's
510 he shouldn't be playing pro football
but he behaves like the best quarterback
in the country and he's done that since
before he was at that level and then his
feelings and emotions and his skill
caught up to that behavior i think the
lesson my dad was trying to teach me
ultimately was in addition to my
language what i do
not how i feel about my past is going to
determine who i am in the future and
that's what i think neutral thinking is
i think neutral thinking isn't just
thinking i think it's behavior and i
think it's language and so your behavior
is what's going to change you
but
you also have to start by asking
yourself what do i want and why do i
want it why don't i have it you know
what am i willing to do to get it and i
do think in terms of listening to to one
of your earlier podcasts i do think
there's value in writing things down
but in a really simple way
i've learned probably the most things
through the best athletes in the world
and michael johnson who had the gold
shoes
i'll never forget drew brees were were
training for the nfl combine in 2001
there's 18 guys
michael just finished winning his fourth
gold medal
and he comes in and he's just
just a badass dude fastest man alive
fastest man alive at that point um he
had just run uh the 43-18
um you know and then when he ran the
19-3 it was uh 26 miles per hour the
fastest the fastest 50 to 150 he ran 9-1
flat
so all these athletes were in awe of
michael
and i think drew at the time says hey
man do you set goals
he said yeah he said where'd you learn
so what do you mean what did i learn so
where'd you learn like do you learn in
college i didn't learn in college
you said did you learn like smart goals
like what the are smart goals you
know and spark goals are specific
measurable attainable realistic and with
the time frame
michael said when i would go into
safeway i recognized that if i walked
into safeway and i wrote eight things
down i would walk into safeway and i'd
walk out of safeway in five minutes if i
walked into safeway and had nothing
written down i would be in there for 20
minutes and i'd find myself on aisle 8
and i'd be anxious and i'd be nervous
and i'd be why am i looking at the wind
weathens and the ho-ho's when i know i
don't need any of those things and he
said so because i wrote it down in
safeway and it worked i figured why
would i be any different about my
athletic career
and i think that that's the level that
we need to educate people i hope it
takes what it takes
basically
is an introduction to self-help
that
when i look at mindfulness being
the brand and and uh headspace being a
billion-dollar evaluation and i sit
there and think
at you know 44 years old and growing up
in this my whole life the only time i
can meditate is at the end of church
it's such a challenging skill and is it
important absolutely it's important do
our affirmations important absolutely
they're important are changing from the
inside out important yes but they're not
the starting points
don't say stupid out loud be
mindful of what you consume if i watch
three minutes of news it increases my
probability by 27
i'm going to say i had a shitty day
right when i was going through and you
know when i was going through a
divorce i had a lawsuit i had some
health challenges all these different
types of things if i'm listening to jake
owen or sam hunt i love new country but
new country makes me just want to go run
and jump off a cliff
you know it makes me think i'm never
going to meet another girl ever again in
my life which i hope is not true
you know and and so what are the things
that are in our control what we watch
when we get home
what we listen to when we're in our car
who we talk to when we get on our cell
phone and what we say out loud always as
we speak and i think that those are the
powerful things and ultimately our
behavior is what's going to define our
success
yeah i love that man it really does all
come down to behavior and that all of
this boils down to what you do on a
day-to-day basis which brings me to a
concept that you got from your dad about
hope and how powerful that is
how can people use hope why does it
matter how does that fit into this
equation
yeah i i think my dad's belief was when
you become helpless you become hopeless
and when i feel like i can control my
behavior when i feel like i'm in
control of even if i'm going through
cancer
even if i'm going through a difficult
challenge even if i'm going through a
re-org in a business
you know if i still feel like okay this
is not optimal but there's something i
can do then i'm helpful to myself and
when i'm helpful i'm hopeful and when
i'm helpless i'm hopeless so my dad's
belief always was to make hope a habit
and and that hope was the most powerful
medicine that we all have and then i
think we have to believe
that we can influence our future
you know we've got to believe i believe
that no matter what i'm facing i can
influence my future that just because my
first marriage didn't work that doesn't
mean my second marriage won't but it's
incumbent upon me to be better
right and that's where
if i'm spending time well she didn't do
this she didn't do there's nothing i can
do about that
right but that's true and that's where
you're talking about well the past feels
predictive
right well i thought you know hey what
what are you going to do to be different
going forward but
so many people think the self-help
industry is about things you do
i think one of the things that makes
athletes so incredible is what they're
willing not to do
what they're willing not to say
what they're willing not to eat
what they're what they're willing not to
consume what they're willing not to
watch
that's what makes think about it's
january 2020 what are five things you
cannot do right now that will instantly
make your life better talk to me about
the illusion of choice yeah i think
that's so powerful
you know it was really fascinating so
um
i was um you know obviously i've worked
in the sports world for a long time and
i was my first nba team was the memphis
grizzlies
and
guys love college football and vince
carter
who's 42 now same age as tom brady and
still playing in the nba plays for
atlanta
vince was about 37
at the time
and we had just had three players
arrested at one of the programs i was
headed to in one night like we hit our
quota for her like for a night and
vince and i were talking he loved
college football and he said he said how
many of those guys trev want to play in
the nba or in the nfl and i said
probably seven out of ten and he said
and isn't it crazy
they think they can do whatever they
want and still make it to that level
and i said what do you mean he said he
said well i'm 37 i'm still playing in
the nba you think i can do whatever i
want i said what do you mean yeah i do
think you can he said no my choices are
finite i said what do you mean like
choice is an illusion he said choice is
absolutely an illusion there's a set of
behaviors that i do that allow me to
play at 37. i can't slam dunk the ball
now yes i can still slam dunk but if i
slam dunk it takes its toll on my knees
and i can't get back and play defense
fast enough so when i get down i lay the
ball up more times than not i don't eat
fast food after games i lift weight
every day of games and i said so choice
is an illusion he said yeah
and i ended up going at that point he
was heading over to the university of
alabama
and we sort of coined the idea of the
illusion of choice there are no choices
when you decide when you decided you
wanted to build you didn't decide you
wanted to build a billion dollar empire
but you decided you wanted to make a
different type of
uh nutritional
bar correct
did you start with the bar yeah
and so there was there was either going
to be a way that you did it or there was
going to be the way and there was going
to be a way that tasted just like muscle
milk or there was going to be a way that
was going to be different and you either
did it or you didn't correct yeah and
you were either going to commit the time
and i'm just using you as an example but
if i want to have a good relationship i
saw a statistic that said the average
married couple talks 27 minutes a week
i was talking to some of my buddies
about that and they're like that much
what i find all the time
but uh
that's obviously not a good statistic
well are you born
with the gift to make time for people no
it's a behavior
so to me the illusion of choice is
thinking you can have a good marriage
and talk 27 minutes a week so you have
to
make time
in order to talk and maybe you're on the
road you travel a lot turning your tv
off when you're on the road doing simple
better turning the tv off turning the
light off and just engaging in a
conversation
you know if you're engaging with your
kids there's a way to do it and there's
a way not to do it thinking you have an
infinite amount of choices
is idiotic
and this generation right now generation
z and generation y both think they can
do whatever the they want to do
and and still achieve things
you can achieve whatever you want to do
in many cases if you're willing to get
behind the behaviors that drive that
success but it won't be anything
pete carroll for the seahawks he'll let
you go to bed at five in the morning if
you want as long as you can perform to a
9.5 standard when you get there
okay well what you're going to figure
out is you can't go to bed at five in
the morning okay so
you're gonna have to adapt your behavior
to get in alignment with winning
behaviors so the illusion of choice is
this fact that there are not an infinite
amount of choices there may be options
yeah i can get uh pasta instead of a
cheeseburger but even if i want to
maintain a diet or maintain optimal
health then i have to limit how much
calorie intake
what type of fluids when i when i first
lost weight i i didn't understand that
gatorade had 800 calories in it you know
when you drink those four gatorades even
though all you're eating is lunchables
you're actually
like driving all these calories and it's
just
am i doing simple better
and if you want to lose weight there's a
way to do it
yeah i love that that's super powerful
that your choices are limited by what
you're trying to achieve right there's a
finite amount yeah that's really smart
yeah where can people connect with you
find out more about what you're up to
get the book yeah
so the book right now is that think big
dash gofar.com book
but they can get it on audible they can
get it on harpercollins they can get it
on really any different environment
i've kind of only had twitter for a
couple years so i'm just learning how to
do social media so
they can follow at trevor moad
t-r-e-v-o-r-m-o-a-w-a-d i think we've
done a nice job
and then
in the sports world i have the moad
group which kind of works with athletes
and then limitless minds is our business
that works with corporations and
executives nice
all right what is the impact that you
want to have in the world with all these
things that you're doing
i want to demystify thinking
i just i want to demystify it i don't
want people to feel like it's only for
people that are really really bright
i want to demystify the idea that that
change is a challenge
nice i like that
well guys
i love that he is taking a new approach
to thinking whether it's just
understanding the difference between
positive and negative and understanding
that there's something else in the
middle or all of the nuanced stuff that
he goes into the book i think they're
incredibly powerful tactics that you
will find immeasurably useful in your
life check out the book engage with him
on social it will definitely allow you
to get to that next level and speaking
of next level if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
my man trevor thank you dude pleasure
that was wonderful the greatest fear in
modern times is what other people think
so our job
is to love others
and not give a what they think of
us
because we only get one emotion at a
time that's our brain works one emotion
so our job